[SQUEAKING]
[RUSTLING] [CLICKING]
PABLO SHMERKIN: OK.
So hi, everyone.
I'm Pablo, I'm teaching
Larry's lecturer this week.
I hope we are all here to
learn about prediction theory.
The plan for this week is to
talk about Bourgain's prediction
theorem, which is an
extremely important theorem
with applications in many
areas of mathematics, including
some pretty striking
recent ones.
And I think Larry has told
you at least a bit about it.
Well, we won't be able to
do a full proof because it
would take way too long.
But what I'm going
to do is explain--
OK, so you've seen the analog of
this theorem in the finite field
setting.
I'm going to state it again
to so as our starting point.
And then the plan is
to go through the steps
in the strategy in the
finite field setting
and see what goes wrong and
what are the ideas that one uses
to overcome what goes wrong.
OK, so recall how this theorem
looks like in the finite field
setting.
And by finite field, I mean
prime finite field, prime order,
because otherwise,
it's not true.
The statement was,
hopefully, something
like this, given t between 0
and 2 and s between 0 and 1.
t, I want it to
be neither 0 nor 2
because there wouldn't
be anything to say.
s has to be positive.
Could be 1.
There exists some epsilon that
depends on these two parameters
and is positive with the
following properties.
If X is in Fp squared
and has size p to the s.
So s dimensional
set in some sense.
And D is a set of directions,
let's say a subset of p.
And it has size p to
the t, so dimension t.
Then so I use the notation pi
theta of X to be the projection.
And we can write the projection
in this way, I guess,
just x1 plus theta x2.
So from Fp squared to Fp.
Then we can find a--
sorry, I messed up the
parameters already.
So the size of X is between
p to the 0 and p squared,
and t is between 0 and 2.
So this should be t.
This should be s.
OK.
Then there is a "large,"
between quotes, projection.
Then the maximum over
theta in D of the size
of the projection
of X is at least
p to the t over 22 plus epsilon.
So we're getting an
epsilon over t over 2.
And p to the t over 2 is
the obvious lower bound.
And I'm going to come back
to this obvious lower bound
in a minute.
In fact, there is
a stronger version.
I think you proved
this in detail,
and you discussed
the stronger version.
So let me state the stronger
version because, well, first
of all, it's important in
itself for applications
of the finite
field result. But I
would say it's even more
important in the Euclidean case.
Not only we can
find-- so this says
we can find the direction so
that the projection is large,
the projection of the whole set.
But moreover, we can
find the direction,
so that if we project
any dense subset of X,
the projection is still large.
So if we take the maximum
over now the minimum--
so we look at the worst
possible subset which is dense.
So we take the minimum
over subsets of X
which are dense in the sense
that they have relative density
p to the minus epsilon.
And then we look at
the projection of Y.
So we try to make the projection
of a dense subset of X
as small as possible.
But we can't even if we have
this additional robustness
of looking at all
subsets of Y, we still
have a gain over t over 2.
So this is Bourgain's
projection theorem
in the finite field setting.
And you have proved
at least this version,
and I think discussed
this version.
If anything I say
is not correct,
or if I say something that
you are not familiar with
or you don't understand
anything, please just ask.
So now we want to--
OK, so before moving
to the Euclidean case,
let me make this remark
on the trivial bound.
So the trivial bound is
p to the t over 2 just
without the epsilon.
So this theorem is not
true if we replace p
by p squared or anything
which is not a prime.
Because if you look at Fp
squared, for example, then
Fp is sitting there.
And if we take f to be Xp and D
to be Fp sitting in Fp squared,
we don't escape Fp because Fp
is a f So this is not true.
But without the epsilon,
it's true in any field,
and the argument is trivial.
OK, so one should never
use the word "trivial,"
but I will use it in this case.
So everything is trivial
once you've understood it.
And nothing is trivial
before you've understood it.
But I will still use
the word "trivial" here.
So if D has at
least two elements--
so same setting as above.
So if D has more
than one element,
so let's allow p to the
s where s is positive,
just two elements, then
the maximum over theta in D
of the projection of X is at
least the size of X to the 1/2.
So if the size of
X is p to the t
would be at least
p to the t over 2.
And again, we will
see that this doesn't
use the factor p is prime.
So it's much more general.
This is trivial because
just take two elements.
OK.
Again, trivial.
I will explain it.
And then once you've
understood it,
you will agree that it's
trivial OK, so know that.
So just take two elements.
So D has at least
two elements by--
so let's just take two elements,
phi times theta prime in D.
So the observation
that makes this trivial
is that if you map X to the
projection in direction theta
comma the projection in
direction theta prime--
so this is small X, an
element of Xp squared.
This is injective.
So we can recover a vector
from two projections
by linear algebra.
So this means that the
image of X under this map
has size at least the domain.
Because you have
injective map, the image
has the size of the domain.
OK, so this implies
that the size of X
is at least the size of
the projection in direction
theta of X times the size of the
projection in direction theta
prime.
So at least one of these two
has to be at least square root
of the size of X.
So this is the proof
of the trivial bound.
And I hope you will agree
that it's very easy.
And it uses literally nothing.
Well, it uses that
this map is injective,
but this is a very general fact.
In particular, this is
true on any finite field.
It doesn't have to be prime.
But for this, we
need it to be prime.
So now we want to have
a Euclidean version
of this statement.
And we will see that--
OK, so maybe let's discuss
the Euclidean setting.
So I will start with
the setting, which
is the way in which
Euclidean setting has
appeared in this course before.
But then I will rescale things
to a setting that I like better.
But let's start
with the following.
So we have a parameter R, which
is the scale, or maybe 1 over R
is the scale.
And then we have our set X is
contained in the ball of radius
R. Let's say centered
at the origin
or really any ball of radius R.
It doesn't make any difference.
And let's suppose that X
is a union of unit balls.
And D, let's say in 0, 1.
Maybe 1, 2 would be
slightly more natural,
but it doesn't really
matter much, is a 1 over R
separated set.
OK, so D is a finite
set of directions.
They are separated by
the scale 1 over R.
And X is a unit of
unit balls in BR.
So we measure X by
Lebesgue measure.
We measure D by cardinality
and use bars in both cases.
I think this is the convention
you'll be using in this course.
And well, we would
like the following.
Well, we would like that, right?
So except that now X is not
in Fp squared, but in BR,
and D is no longer
in Fp but in 0, 1.
So pi theta is still the same.
So pi theta of x1, x2
is x1 plus theta x2.
We could look at
orthogonal projections
but up to a reparametrization
is actually easier to work with.
It's not important.
OK, so we can ask,
Does the same happen?
So just all the bars mean
different things now.
So when we project
X, we are looking
at the measure, the big measure
one-dimensional Lebesgue measure
of the image, and so on.
So do we have any hope of
proving the same theorem
in this generality?
So does anyone want to guess?
Could this theorem be
true in this setting?
AUDIENCE: No, it's not
true because the balls are
closely packed into kind
of a ball of radius blue R.
PABLO SHMERKIN: OK.
Great.
That's a great example.
But that great example, then
I will come back to this,
still satisfies
the trivial bound.
So can the trivial bound happen
in this setting as written?
Because, yeah, if everything
is packed into a smaller
ball, if you project, you
still have an interval of size
the square root.
So you're right, that fails.
I'm going to come
back to your example.
That fails, but
this still holds.
Can the trivial bound
be true in this setting
without assuming anything else?
AUDIENCE: Do you see how
only two interactions are--
PABLO SHMERKIN: OK.
Yeah, two directions
maybe is asking too much.
Let's say there are--
OK.
What is p to the t,
and what is p to the s?
It would be rho to the
t, and rho to the s.
Not rho, R-- R to
the t, R to the s.
Let's say there are R
to the s directions.
Let's make it a little bit more.
Yeah, with two
directions maybe--
OK.
Let's say there are R to
the s directions, which
R1 over R2 separated.
Can the trivial bound hold?
OK, what is an
example of a set that
has one very small projection?
So what is a set
in the plane that
has one very small projection?
AUDIENCE: Called
the Gaussian line?
PABLO SHMERKIN: A line.
OK, you cannot literally be
a line because it's a union
of balls.
But we put the balls
in a long segment.
So an example that should make
us kind of scared is a 1 times
R rectangle.
So we pack with balls in this
way as someone suggested.
Then if we project
literally down,
we get something of size 1,
which is much, much, much less
than square root of R.
But if we perturb the vertical
projection by R to the s,
the projection will
have size R to the s.
And if s is less than 1/2, it
will be less than square root
of R. So instead of
projecting in this direction,
if we project in a nearby
direction, this is still bad.
So if this is X and--
OK.
So I think actually,
I chose a bad--
so this projection cannot
be written in this way.
Oh yes, it can be written in
this way, just theta is 0.
It can be very well
written in this way.
If theta is, let's
say, minus R to the s,
R to the s, then
the projection of X
will have size of the
order of R to the s.
Well, s could be positive
but less than 1/2.
So this is very bad.
So we don't want--
this is not theta.
This is D. So this is very bad.
So we don't want D to
look like an interval
or to be very concentrated in an
interval or something like this.
So we want to avoid
such a situation.
So this is bad.
It makes even the trivial
estimate hopeless.
So maybe we'll come back to this
if there is time, maybe not.
But maybe as an
exercise for you,
not exercise for
marks or anything,
but you can think of it.
Not now.
Now, pay attention.
But you can think later.
What goes wrong
with this argument?
Because in R2, it's still
true that two projections,
even if the angles
are very close,
determine the original vector.
So how is this compatible?
So you can think about this.
And then you will
understand many of the--
well, not many, one of
one of the important
reasons why things are
much more complicated
in this Euclidean world.
OK.
So now suppose that we
avoid this in some way.
Can we have a hope of
having the theorem?
And the answer, as
you said, is still no.
So this is one example we
should be worried about.
Here is another example we
should be worried about, where
X is, essentially, let's say a
ball of radius square root of R.
It can be really any radius
between 0 and 1, but just to--
so X should be a union
of disjoint unit balls.
So we just pack, in
a very dense way,
unit balls in a ball
of radius R to the 1/2.
So the volume of X the
area of X is roughly R.
But if we project it
in any direction--
so we have to get rid
of bad sets like this.
But let's get rid of
bad sets like this
in the strongest possible way.
Let's suppose that
D is everything.
So here, we are focusing on
what can go wrong with X. So
let D be absolutely everything.
Well, here, every projection is
going to be a segment of length
roughly R to the 1/2.
So if you look at
the projection of X,
this has size roughly square
root of the size of X.
And this is for every theta.
So in fact, if you avoid
this in a suitable way,
we recover the trivial bound,
but it is no longer trivial.
Maybe we'll come back
to this on Thursday
depending on how we
are doing with time.
So the trivial bound is
no longer trivial even
in the best case.
But if we want to go
beyond the trivial bound,
we also need to assume
something about X.
So we need to avoid this,
and we need to avoid this.
And you see that in both
cases, what's going on--
so the geometric
picture is different.
But in both cases,
D is an interval.
X is a ball.
So we want to avoid D
looking like an interval or X
looking like a box.
If we do that in a
suitable way, then we
can indeed get a
similar statement.
So let me actually state it.
OK, let me say that
Bourgain didn't state it
in this way, but--
it follows from what he proved.
Suppose that-- same
setting as before.
So we are still assuming this.
Would have been faster to just
write everything down again.
OK, but we need to
add some assumptions
to avoid these bad examples.
OK, so first of all, we
need some quantifiers.
So given 0, t.
So t is strictly between 0
and 2 and s larger than 0.
There exist now two parameters.
So I could do with
one parameter.
So you see that even
here, I'm using epsilon
for two different things--
for the growth and for
the robustness in passing
two subsets.
Here, I'm going to use two
different letters because they
denote different things.
So there exists epsilon and
eta, both, depending on s and t,
and both positive such
that the following holds.
So suppose that we have
X union of unit balls
in the R, 1 over R
separated set of directions.
And then we need to assume
something because otherwise it's
not true.
So we need to assume that X
and D are not very concentrated
in small balls or
small intervals.
So this is what we
are going to assume.
If we intersect X with
any ball of radius r,
we see only a small piece
of X And the smaller they
are, the smaller the piece.
The range of this little
r is between 1 and big R,
because X is a
union of unit balls,
and it's a subset of the R ball.
So this should be less
than or equal than what?
Well, on the one hand,
we want to compare this
to the natural
scale, which is R.
So this tells us how much
smaller the reference scale is
compared to the global scale.
And let's put the t here, which
is motivated by the fact that--
OK.
So X has area R to the t And
D has cardinality R to the s.
This t matches this t.
I'm going to have the size of X.
So this is saying if R is
much smaller than big R--
so if R is big R,
we have all of X.
So we cannot get any gain
because X is contained
in the ball of radius R. But
if we are intersecting X with
a smaller ball, we
have a big decay,
sort of power decay with respect
to-- so only a very small part
of X can be in a small ball
compared to the whole of X.
It turns out that it's very
important for applications
to have some leeway here.
And this leeway is given
by this parameter eta.
So this leeway says
that actually, we
don't need to assume anything if
little r is very close to big R.
Because if r is
very close to big R,
this will still
be bigger than 1,
and then we have a
trivial inequality.
So this is saying the
global scales don't matter.
OK.
A very similar story with
D. If we intersect D--
OK, both here are intervals,
but I'm going to--
steal the notation for balls.
This is at most.
Again, we have our
leeway R to the epsilon.
And then rho is between 0 and 1.
So here, the right thing to
write is rho to the s times--
OK, so the size of X
is actually R to the t.
But still, I want to
write it in this way
so it's clear that when we
intersect with the ball,
we are seeing only a small piece
of X. And the same thing here.
OK, so these are the
conditions that we
impose to avoid these
bad counterexamples.
You could say that
they are overkill.
And we are avoiding
not only this but--
OK.
Put it in a different way,
there is a whole universe
between this and this.
And, yeah, this is true.
In fact, these conditions
can be weakened.
Maybe I will make some
remark about this.
Anyway, so these
are the assumptions.
Then there exists one direction.
And once there is
one direction, there
are many directions, such that
we have the same conclusion.
So if we look at the infimum
over all dense subsets--
and "dense" means with
respect to this parameter eta.
So eta is like a
tolerance parameter.
It gives us some leeway at
different places to play with.
So Y is a dense subset of X
with this leeway R to the minus
epsilon.
Then we project the subset,
and we get the gain.
So the "trivial" now is
no longer trivial but sort
of natural.
Lower bound is t over 2.
And we beat it by epsilon.
Yes.
AUDIENCE: Does Y also have
to be a union of unit balls?
PABLO SHMERKIN: That's
a very good question.
I don't think so.
But, yeah, just in case, yes.
Just in case I'm too tired, yes.
Yeah.
Let's say yes.
So we're going to restate
this in a different language
soon, where we will
get rid of balls.
But, yeah, let's say Y is
also union of unit balls
So you see that there
are lots of parameters.
It's kind of a
technical statement.
The assumption
looks a bit strange
if you have never
seen this before,
but nevertheless is, again,
an extremely important theorem
with an unbelievable
range of applications.
We keep discovering
applications.
Something which is also
important to remark
is that all the
applications really use
the statement as a black box.
Sometimes people also get
inspired by the proof.
But it's not a situation
where the proof gets used,
really the statement gets used.
So it's a very, very
powerful statement.
And I guess in the rest
of the course with Larry,
you will see some of the ways
in which it is very powerful.
How does one prove this?
By the way, I'm going to,
as I say, sketch the proof,
skipping pretty
much all details.
But the proof I'm going to
sketch is not Bourgain's proof.
It's maybe a new proof
that I'm writing together
with Hong Wang that takes
ideas from different places.
So it's not Bourgain's
original proof.
The general scheme
will follow the steps
that you've seen in the
finite field setting,
but there are very
significant challenges.
So what I'm going to do is
go over each of the steps
and explain what
the challenges are
and what can one do to fix them.
And then you will have to
trust me that, indeed, they
can be fixed.
So I won't go into the details.
Before doing so, you saw that if
you want to go from finite field
to Euclidean settings,
sometimes you
have to add more assumptions,
otherwise things fail
because of some easy examples.
But this is not always the case.
So there are some statements
in the finite setting that
extend a pretty straightforward
way to this Euclidean setting.
So in order to do
this, I'm going
to change the language a little
bit and maybe rescale this.
So instead of looking at unions
of unit balls in the R ball,
I'm going to look at--
so basically, I need to rescale
the set down by 1 over R.
So X is going to live
in the unit ball.
And then it will be a
union of 1 over R balls.
And of course, if you
rescale you scale,
you have to scale everywhere
else in the statement.
But instead of looking at
the volume of the set X,
I'm going to use the
delta-covering number.
For the directions, instead of
assuming that they are disjoint,
I'm also going to use
delta-covering number.
So I bring both--
so basically X and
D, I want to use
the same language and same scale
to make things more homogeneous.
So let me spend a couple
of minutes talking
about delta-covering number.
Suppose that X is a subset
of really any metric space,
but let's say Rd, then--
OK, so this is, I'm guessing,
definition or notation X bar
delta.
So bar with the subscript
delta is the smallest.
number of delta balls needed
to cover X. Could be infinite,
but in all this
business, we are only
looking at bounded sets, in
which case this is finite.
So everything we
are going to see
is going to be a finite number.
Basically, our measuring
resolution is delta.
We cannot distinguish anything
that happens under scale delta.
So this is a natural way of
measuring the size of the set.
Just a definition, but
some observations--
well, the first one I think
I should never use the word
"trivial," but I hope I'm
justified in saying that this is
trivial if X is, to
make it really trivial,
2 delta separated, then the
delta-covering number is just
the cardinality, because
for each point in the set,
we need a different ball.
So this will be the case for D.
D is delta separated, but delta
separated, 2 delta separated.
Doesn't make a big difference.
So if the set is
delta separated,
it's morally just cardinality.
If X is a union of delta balls,
then the delta-covering number
is--
well, you use the
balls to cover the set.
You need to normalize to pass
between measure and counting
how many balls there are.
So I think it should be
delta to the minus D.
So D is the ambient
dimension where
X leaves times the
Lebesgue measure of X.
Did I get this right?
It's not actually equal.
It's comparable.
Yes.
AUDIENCE: Afterward, does X
have to be a disjoint union
of delta balls?
PABLO SHMERKIN: That's
a very good question.
No.
It's easier to believe if it is
a disjoint union of delta balls.
And it is also true if
it's a non-disjoint union
of delta balls.
The reason is that if you
have a non-disjoint union
of delta balls, you can cover
it by finitely overlapping.
OK, if you have a disjoint
union of delta balls--
I hope this is clear, because
the best way to cover it
by using those balls.
If you have a finite overlapping
collection of delta balls, then
you just cover by defining the
overlapping family and you lose.
Any union of balls, you can
cover by finitely overlapping.
So I guess you
need some covering
theorem to make it precise.
Anyway, it's true, and we
are not going to use it.
But you can convince
yourself that it's true.
Again, easier to believe if the
balls are disjoint, but also
true if the balls are disjoint.
It's equal if the
balls are not disjoint.
There is a wiggle.
In fact, the wiggle, I guess,
maybe depends on the ambient
dimension D.
I'm just making these remarks
to explain how this relates
to our previous setting.
Because now, from now on, we're
going to measure everything
by the delta-covering number.
The point I want to
make is that this
recovers the volume and
the cardinality when
the sets are delta-separated
or union of delta balls.
Another way of thinking
about delta-covering-number
is as a box-counting number.
So let D delta be the
covering of D by delta cubes.
So this is delta k plus 0 delta.
Maybe let's make it
half open so that this
is a partition to the d,
where k is in Z to the d.
So I'm just doing
a dyadic covering.
Delta doesn't have to
be dyadic, but I'm--
so this is-- how do you say?
The tiling of Rd by
cubes of size delta.
I make them half open
so they are disjoint,
but it's not very important
OK, so the delta-covering
number is up to a multiplicative
constant, the number of
cubes in the delta that
are hit by the set.
So the cardinality of
the cubes in D delta
which intersect the set.
So this is why this is called
box counting number as well.
Why is this true
is because if you
cover by cubes in
an efficient way--
so if you know how many
cubes you are hitting, well,
you can cover each cube by
a finite number of balls
of radius delta.
Again, this wiggle
may depend on d.
So d is a fixed parameter.
It will be 1 or 2 for
protection theorem.
So I consider it as a constant.
So you can cover
each of these cubes
by a finite number of
delta balls and vice versa.
If you have a delta
ball, you can cover it
by a finite number of cubes.
So that's the proof,
proof by picture.
One nice consequence of
this is that this allows
us to snap any set to a grid.
And then this allows us to
apply Euclidean-- not Euclidean,
integer results.
Discrete results.
So let's define-- so what is
X superscript bracket delta?
It's the set that is obtained
by snapping points to the grid.
So if X intersects this
cube, then this point
will be in X delta.
And this way, I snap
it to the lattice.
OK.
Formally, this is all the
case such that the cube delta
k plus 0 delta to
the d intersects X.
So anytime that we see something
here, we look at this point.
And then because of this,
the delta-covering number
is roughly up to a
multiplicative constant,
the same as the cardinality.
This is now a finite set.
It's a finite set in a lattice.
So it's not just the lattice.
It's just the integer
lattice scaled down by delta,
but it's just the
integer lattice.
By using this, one can extend
many results that are true EZD
to delta-covering numbers.
So using this, in particular,
the following three things,
which are three
very important tools
in the proof of the finite field
case of recurrence projection
theorem and also in
the Euclidean case,
the Ruzsa triangle inequality.
The Plunnecke-Ruzsa
inequalities.
And the Balog-Szemerédi-Gowers
theorem.
They all hold for delta-covering
numbers by putting bar there.
So when you see
bar, you put delta.
You use multiplicative
constants because of this.
So where you have equality,
you no longer have equality.
But this is very harmless.
For example, I'm going to
state that Ruzsa triangle
inequality as a model.
And then you can imagine
how the other two behave.
So we have three sets in
the same Rd, let's say,
bounded to make sure that the
delta-covering number is finite.
Then let's see if
I get this right.
If not, you just let me know.
OK.
In the original, so in the
discrete Ruzsa triangle
inequality, here
we have inequality.
Here, we have inequality
up to a constant.
So this is the only
thing we have to change.
OK.
Did I get this right?
Is this the correct statement?
OK, so this is an example.
Just put delta, delta, delta,
delta, and change equality
by equality up to a constant.
And how do you prove this?
Well, you snap it to the grid.
You have to be a little
bit careful because you
can snap A to the grid.
You can snap B to the grid.
And then you can take A minus
B for the snapped versions.
That's not going to be exactly
the same as snapping a minus b
to the grid.
So there is something that
doesn't exactly commute,
but it almost commutes.
So almost commutes.
So I'm not going to--
another exercise is for
you to convince yourself
that this is true.
So you see that for
the projection theorem,
we really need to
impose assumptions
if we want it to hold in
the Euclidean setting.
But this is not always true.
Here, we have three
very important tools.
They basically work
in the same way.
So now we can start
going over the steps
in the proof of the theorem, the
finite field setting and seeing
what the obstacles are and
what one can do to overcome
the obstacles if one wants to
follow the same scheme of proof
in the Euclidean setting.
Any questions so far?
In the finite
field setting, what
was the first step in the proof?
It was to prove expansion using
a polynomial for just one set.
So let's recall what this was.
So if we have A in Fp--
OK, I guess let's say
the quantifiers first.
So given S in 0, 1, there
exists an epsilon such
that the following holds.
If we have a subset
of our prime field--
so here, it has to
be a prime field.
These are ready fails if
it is not a prime field.
I'm going to come back to
this point several times.
Suppose that it has
size P to the s.
Then there exists a polynomial--
actually, there
exists a polynomial,
which is fixed for all s, for
all epsilon, and for all a.
It can be x1, x2,
x3 minus x4, x5, x6.
So that polynomial works,
but it doesn't really
matter which polynomial it is.
So let's call it Q. If we
apply Q to A, we get expansion.
OK, so I think what
you did with Larry
gave the following polynomial.
But I think it was
clear from what
you did with Larry
that this really
doesn't matter which polynomial
it is, as long as you
have some polynomial.
Because at a later
stage, one is going
to apply Plunnecke-Ruzsa to
bring down the polynomial
the simplest
possible polynomial.
So that was a later step.
At this step, any
polynomial works.
So this one works, but it's
not important, which one it is.
How did you prove this?
So we can see to what extent
things go wrong in the Euclidean
setting, and to what extent we
can recycle some of the ideas.
So idea of proof.
If I claim that you saw
something with Larry
and you didn't,
please let me know.
He told me and showed me
notes, but I could still
be wrong about something.
What was the idea of
proof behind these?
So one looks at,
maybe let's call it
X. A minus A over A minus A.
Here, we skip 0.
We don't want to divide by 0.
And then there are
two possibilities.
Either X is everything, and then
one can conclude in some way--
I know this is not--
I'm not going to
recall how to do it.
The other possibility is
that X is not everything.
If it's not everything, there
exists some little X in X
such that X plus 1 is not in
X. Because it's not everything.
And then one can also conclude.
So in both cases,
one has to work.
I'm not saying it's
trivial, but this
was the structure of the proof.
These extremely innocent
step is what distinguishes
Fp from Fp squared.
If you were working
in Fp squared,
we would not be able to do
this because Fp squared has
a subgroup which is Fp.
So you cannot escape
Fp by adding 1.
So this extremely
innocent adding plus 1,
distinguishes Fp and
Fp squared, let's say.
We want to do something similar.
So let's say we have an A.
Well, first of all, it's
very likely that we will need
to assume something about A.
In fact, we need to assume
something about in the Euclidean
setting, because
if A is a segment,
like any polynomial
check, it doesn't grow.
So if X is 1, 1 plus R, 1,
1 plus delta to the 1 minus
t, something like this,
just a small segment,
if you add it to itself
multiplied by itself,
you get slightly
longer segments.
There is no real growth.
It's exactly the
same issue as we
had when we were
projecting an X which was
to concentrate in a large ball.
But now we know how
to get rid of that.
We need to assume that A
is not too concentrated
inside any segment.
But even assuming
that we do that,
we see that we have
lots of problems
if we try to do
something like this.
What are the problems?
So can you tell
me some problems?
So some challenges in trying
to do something like this.
If now A is a subset of
let's say 0, 1 or 1, 2--
let's say 0, 1.
It doesn't matter.
So what things you
should be worried about?
Yes.
AUDIENCE: X should be unbounded.
PABLO SHMERKIN: X
could be unbounded.
Yes.
So in the finite field, we need
to avoid 0 in the denominator.
But in the Euclidean case, we
don't only need to assume 0.
We should be very worried
about small denominators, not 0
but small denominators, because
this is going to blow up.
Yeah, this is
certainly an issue.
Are there any other issues
one should worry about?
AUDIENCE: What does it mean
to equal Fp in this case?
PABLO SHMERKIN: That's right.
Well, I mean, what does
it mean to recall Fp?
It's not clear.
I would say what is
even much less clear
is, What does it mean to add 1?
Because I don't know,
R is certainly not--
I mean, R is invariant
than adding 1.
I mean, this doesn't
live in 0, 1 anymore.
If we force it to live in 0,
1 by intersecting with 0, 1,
there could still be something.
I mean, if we add 1, we
could still land here.
So adding 1 doesn't
seem like a good idea.
From a conceptual
point of view, there
is something that is even
more worrying, which is here,
it is crucial that Fp doesn't
have any additive subgroup.
So it's a simple group.
It doesn't have any
non-trivial subgroups.
Because if it had a subgroup,
this wouldn't be true.
Now does R have any subfields
or subgroups or subrings?
Well, first of all, it does have
subgroups, additive subgroups.
It does of any dimension.
So, of course, it does.
All of our rational
numbers, number fields.
But number fields are countable.
So we are interested
in larger things.
But it does have some
groups of intermediate size.
It does not have subrings
of intermediate size.
But this is a difficult theorem.
In fact, it's a consequence
of projection theorem.
So we cannot really use it.
So here, we are escaping
because X is not a subring.
But it's not so clear if there
is a subring type structure here
in R.
All of these things
should make it very scary,
and a normal person would
give up at this stage.
But there is a paper by
Larry Guth and Josh Zahl,
my colleague at
UBC, and Etzkowitz,
where they managed to extend
this idea to the Euclidean
setting, not to prove
Bourgain's projection theorem--
to prove some different
related theorem.
So let me tell you what they
did to overcome these obstacles.
But first of all, I
should define something
that I should have
defined before.
So we have these
non-concentration conditions.
So we call these
non-concentration conditions
because it tells us that X and
D are not concentrated in both,
non-concentration conditions.
So looking at this, we are going
to write a definition, which
is inspired by this
so that we don't
have to repeat these sorts
of conditions every time.
By the way, even
in the finite field
setting, what Bourgain, Katz,
and Tao did was also not this.
So this idea came later.
It originated from Gaurav, which
is after Bourgain, Katz, and Tao
proved something like this.
So Bourgain this is something
much, much more complicated.
OK.
Definition.
A subset of the
unit ball in Rd--
we just want to fix
some region of space,
so why not fix the unit ball?
Let delta be between
0 and 1, not 0.
And maybe also not 1.
So we say that this is a delta.
And then we have a parameter
t, which is between 0 and d.
And then we have a
constant, which is positive,
let's say at least 1.
We say that X is
a delta S, C, d.
So this d tells us
the ambient dimension,
and I will probably
forget to write it down,
or it will be
clear from context.
Set if the following holds.
If we intersect X--
so I'm not assuming X
is a union of vaults.
I'm not assuming X
is delta-separated.
I'm not assuming anything,
and I'm not assuming anything
because I'm using to use the
delta-covering number to measure
things.
So this is nothing about
the delta-covering number.
You don't need to
assume anything
as long as you remember
to write the bad delta.
So if I intersect
X with the ball
and measure it by the
delta-covering number,
this is at most C. So C is the
tolerance, the leeway that I
have, times R to the s.
So s measures the
degree of concentration
of non-concentration, the
degree of non-concentration.
So the larger the s--
so R is going to be between 0
and 1, or between delta and one.
So the larger s,
the smaller this is,
and the stronger this condition
becomes times the size of X.
So again, this says that a ball
cannot contain too much of X.
And this is for every center and
for every radius between delta
and 1.
Yes.
AUDIENCE: The s
is supposed to be
t unless you use both s and t.
PABLO SHMERKIN: Sorry, yes.
But it could be s or t,
but one has to fix one.
Yeah, s.
Thank you.
OK, so I hope you agree that
in the statement of Bourgain's
projection theorem, this is the
condition we have on x and on d.
On X, we have a t, and
on d, we have an s.
But this is the
condition that we had.
And so we can bring them both
under the same umbrella using
the delta-covering number.
OK.
This is saying X is not too
concentrated inside small balls.
And the strength of
concentration is given by s,
and there is a tolerance given
by C. C could depend on delta.
So C is anything.
In particular, it
could depend on delta.
And in the statement of
Bourgain projection theorem--
so in Bourgain projection
theorem, this, in fact,
is going to be delta
to the minus eta.
So we have a leeway that
increases as a power with delta,
is very small power but
nevertheless a power.
So now we can state something.
I don't know.
Lemma.
So it is the analog of the
first step in the proof.
So it's the analog of this.
Given an s between 0 and
1, there exists an epsilon,
and all these epsilons
can be taken to depend--
they depend continuously on s.
So this is important.
OK.
Well, I started saying the
sentence I'm going to finish.
So in the finite field
setting, one does this.
And then what is the next step?
One iterates this.
And then one keeps growing.
In order to know that
you keep growing,
you need to know that this
epsilon remains bounded away
from 0 as long as the exponent
remains bounded away from 1.
OK, so the same is
going to be true here,
although as we will
see next time--
I think next time is much, much
more complicated to iterate
in this case.
But let's focus
on this for today.
Given s, there is an epsilon
such that the following holds.
Suppose A is in 0, 1.
The delta-covering number
is delta to the minus s,
and A is a delta s is delta to
the epsilon minus epsilon set.
So it's very non-concentrated
because s matches the size.
But on the other hand, there
is quite a bit of leeway
in this delta to
the minus epsilon.
OK, so there exists a polynomial
Q. It could be the same Q,
so that Q if you want.
Any polynomial.
So really, it doesn't matter
because you can always
apply Plunnecke-Ruzsa.
But let's say that polynomial.
But any polynomial will do.
Then we have growth.
I'm just putting delta-covering
number everywhere.
And we get growth.
So we get delta minus s,
which was the size of A.
But we get a delta to the
minus epsilon grow over delta.
It looks very, very
similar to that.
To what?
To this.
Except that we need to add this
non-concentration assumption.
We certainly need to add
something because otherwise,
if A is just an
interval it's not true,
it's not clear between
interval and this what happens.
But OK, with this
assumption, it is true.
OK, so how can one prove that?
So we want to use this
strategy, but we saw
that there are many problems.
So I'm not going to
do the whole proof.
But I'm going to tell you how
to solve two of the problems.
To some degree, I
will tell you how
to solve two of the problems.
One is really cheating, but OK.
So I guess what
I'm going to tell
you is that cheating
doesn't always work,
but it does work in this
case, in this particular case.
I should finish at 2:25.
Is that right?
OK, plenty of time.
The idea of proof.
I'm not going to prove it, but--
in the finite field
setting, this works.
Here, we have the problem
that the denominator can
be very small, and then
this could be huge.
So well, we are going to do
two things at twice to try
to at least reduce the issue.
So we're going to define
B in the following way.
It is essentially A
minus A over A minus A.
So we pick some gamma.
And the gamma in the proof
has to be picked carefully
so that things work out.
I'm going to go into
the proof, but you
would have to pretend that there
is a gamma so that will work.
OK, so first of all, I
restrict the denominators
to being larger than
delta to the gamma.
In this way, well, I got rid
of the worst possible case
where the expansion is too much.
But even then, this could
escape the interval 0, 1.
I don't want to escape
the interval 0, 1.
So I intersect it with
So this B is going to play the
role of X. By doing this, again,
I'm avoiding two related but
not exactly the same issues.
One is that this could escape
our reference interval.
And the other is that the
denominators could be too small.
They can still be
quite small because--
so gamma is not zero, so
this can still be small.
So there is a trade-off.
If we allow two small
denominators denominator,
things blow up too much.
But we still have to
allow small denominators.
Otherwise, we are
missing too much
of A minus A over A
minus A. So this gamma
gives us the trade off.
So that's one thing we do.
But the most important
thing to understand
is, What do we do
instead of this?
So really, adding
1 doesn't really
make sense in this setting.
So what do we do?
Here comes a very easy but
absolutely critical lemma.
So in the same way
that the method in Fp
doesn't work in Fp
squared, what works in R--
this is a remark I
should have made earlier,
but I don't think we have
the statement anymore.
We don't have the statement of
Bourgain's projection theorem
anymore.
But Bourgain projection
theorem is not
true Over C, because
over C, you could
take X to be essentially R
squared, leaving in C squared.
You could take D to be
a piece of R, leaving
in C. Because R is a subring
of C, you don't escape.
So there is no growth.
So it's exactly
the same reason why
it doesn't work in Fp squared.
Because Fp squared has
an intermediate algebraic
structure.
C has an intermediate
algebraic structure which is R.
And because of this,
it doesn't work.
And here, we use
that Fp doesn't have
an intermediate
algebraic structure.
So actually, this lemma is
very crucial in the sense
that it is what distinguishes R
from C or for many other things,
but in particular,
from C. So there
are many ways in which
R is different from C.
We will see that it is the order
structure, what distinguishes R
from C in the lemma, in
the proof of the lemma.
Actually, the lemma can
be proved in many ways,
and some of them do not
use the order structure.
But in my proof, I will
OK, so here is the lemma.
Suppose that B. Eventually, we
are going to apply to this B.
That's why I call it B.
But a priori is any B,
is contained in 0, 1.
And suppose that 0 is
in B. 0 is in this B
because a1 could be equal to a2.
And then let rho be
the largest gap in B.
What is the largest gap?
So a gap is a connected
component of the complement.
So we are in R. So connected
components are segments.
So the complement is
a union of segments.
Well, it could be points.
I mean, it could be dense.
But let's imagine B is closed.
I think it doesn't
have to be closed.
Maybe let's say closed.
It's not really important.
If it's closed
and the complement
is a finite or countable
union of open intervals.
Each of them has a length,
and we take the supremum.
Everything is going to be
finitary in our application.
But let's say the largest
in the sense of the supremum
of the length of the gaps in B.
So is it clear what this is?
We just look at the
complementary intervals,
and we look at the largest one.
Then there exists B in B such
that either the distance from B
over 2 to B is at least rho
over 4 or the distance from B
plus 1 over 2 to B is
at least rho over 4.
So proof.
Let B prime be B over 2
union B plus 1 over 2.
This means what you
expect it to mean.
So you take little b
and B divide it by 2.
And you do that for
every little b and B.
And then you take
little b plus 1 over 2
for every little b and B. So I
hope it's clear what this is.
This is containing 0, 1 as well,
because B is containing 0, 1.
So this is contained in 0, 1/2.
This is containing 1/2, 1.
So we have 0.
We have 1.
We have 1/2.
And 1/2 is in B prime
because 0 is in B.
You will see that
this is important.
So 0 is in B. So
1/2 is in B prime.
Now what is the
largest gap in B prime?
So by definition, the
largest gap in B is rho.
So that's the definition of rho.
So what is the largest
gap in B prime?
AUDIENCE: Rho over 2.
PABLO SHMERKIN: Rho over 2.
Here, the largest
gap is rho over 2
because I'm scaling
down by a factor of 2.
And here, the largest
gap is rho over 2
because I'm translating
a scaling down by--
yes.
AUDIENCE: So we know actually
there'll be a gap of size rho
if B has a big gap at the
ends of the intervals?
PABLO SHMERKIN: So
I guess maybe let's
assume that 1 is also in
B or something like this.
So I mean, there could
be an infinite gap.
Is that what you're
worried about?
AUDIENCE: Yeah,
there's a gap from 1
minus rho to 1 or something,
but if 1 is in B then.
PABLO SHMERKIN: Well,
let's say 0 and 1 are in B.
So 1 is also here
because you could
take a3 and a4 to be a1 and a2.
So 1 is in B. If you define
the gap in a way that
avoids this issue, you
don't need 1 to be in B,
but it's not important.
Why is it important
that 1/2 is in B?
Because here, the largest
gap has size rho over 2.
Here, the largest gap
has size rho over 2.
But if 1/2 wasn't here, they
could be combined to form
a larger gap going across.
But it cannot go across
because 1/2 is there.
Now let's draw the largest
gap or the gap that
approximates the largest gap.
So this one has size, let's
say, rho minus epsilon.
OK.
So this is the
center of the gap.
So this is the gap
in B, not in B prime.
In B. Now let's draw an
interval in the middle of length
rho over 2.
Maybe a closed interval.
This closed interval contains
an element of B prime,
because the largest gap
of B prime is rho over 2.
That means that any interval
of length rho over 2
contains a point in B prime.
So maybe let's write this down.
So largest gap--
so this interval
contains a point in B prime.
But this point is
at distance at least
rho over 4 from B because
this gap is double the size.
So even if the point was
at one of the endpoints--
so the point could be here.
But even if it was one of the
endpoints, this is rho over 4.
This is rho over 4.
So maybe let's do
a larger picture.
So this is rho minus epsilon gap
in B. This is a rho interval.
So it contains some
point in B prime.
Because the largest
gap in B prime is rho.
And this interval
has length rho.
So it cannot be
completely empty.
Otherwise, it would
be a larger gap.
Whichever point is
in this interval
is at large distance from B
because there is nothing in B
here.
So that's the proof.
So you do the calculation
is at least rho over 4.
Maybe rho over 5, because
you need to take into account
this epsilon.
Maybe rho over 5, just in case.
It's not important.
So you see that this is a
simple geometric argument,
but it's very, very strongly
uses the order structure of R.
So this argument doesn't work
in C because there is no order.
In fact, it cannot work because
what we are going to prove using
this is not true over C.
Any questions about this?
You can prove this
lemma in other ways.
So both Katz and
Zahl in their paper,
I think they don't
do this proof,
but I think this proof is
easier and shows how the order
structure is fundamental.
Hopefully, I have
proved the lemma.
Of course, a point in B
prime has either this form
or this form because that's
the definition of B prime.
So here, we have a B prime in
B prime, which is far from B
But B prime is
either this or this
because that's the
definition of B prime.
So that's how one
concludes the proof.
Any questions again?
OK, so now what?
The idea is to use B
over 2 or B plus 1 over 2
instead of B plus 1.
So why does B plus 1 work?
So what is important about
B plus 1 or X plus 1?
So what is important is that,
again, it's a polynomial.
In this case, it's
a linear polynomial
that takes something
in X and lands
it not in X. Well, the
same is true for B over 2
and B plus 1 over 2.
You take something in B,
and it lands far from B.
It's a first step of proof,
so I'm not going to prove.
Well, we have to pick a
rho in 0, 1 carefully.
In fact, it's going
to be a power of delta
as usual, some power.
Don't remember which power.
One has to choose
this power carefully.
And then there
are two cases that
morally correspond
to those two cases.
B now is that B. That B up
there, not an arbitrary.
That B, is rho dense.
Rho dense means that the
largest gap is at most rho.
Or if you take the
rho neighborhood,
you cover everything.
Everything is 0, 1.
So any questions about
what rho dense means?
Here, we use an argument, which
is similar to the case X minus X
over X. Sorry, it's not
X. It's A minus A over A
minus A equals Fp to get growth,
which I'm not going to show.
This is the easier case.
I guess here, what's
also the easier case.
The other possibility is that
there exists a B in B such
that either B over 2 is far
from B or B plus 1 over 2
is far from B. In the sense--
so there are two
cases by the lemma.
And then we use over
2 or B plus 1 over 2
in a similar way to
the way that X plus 1
was used in the
finite field setting.
To get expansion.
It works.
It's much more complicated.
So the actual details
are much more complicated
than in the finite
field setting.
But it works.
I would say the overall
idea is very similar,
but the details are
much more complicated.
OK.
So far, so good.
Modulo, lots of details.
But this was the first step
in the finite field setting,
and we can replicate it.
So it seems that
things are going well.
But now we have a
much bigger issue.
Maybe I'm going to explain
the much bigger issue
and talk about how to overcome
it next time, because this
is maybe the biggest issue,
the biggest difference.
You can see that
this was already
a big issue and a big
difference in the proof.
But now comes, I would
say, a bigger issue.
This was the first step in
the finite field setting.
What is the second step in
the finite field setting?
Iterating the first step.
And you just iterate.
Nobody is preventing
you from iterating.
So you get that Q of A growth.
So you can do Q of Q of A.
So here, maybe let's call it.
The second step.
You look at Q of Q of Q of Q
of A. And this is very large.
So you can make it as close to p
as you want in terms of powers.
I don't know.
I don't know, eta.
So for any eta, if we iterate
enough times, we keep growing,
and we can reach
any power we want.
In fact, eventually,
in hindsight,
we get all of the finite
field after iterating
finitely many times.
I don't know if you
saw this, but anyway.
So this is clear because
we just keep iterating.
So now let's go back to--
sorry, did I ever state--
oh, here it is.
Here is the lemma
that I told you
we can prove using this idea.
So this is the lemma.
So we have a delta s delta
to the minus epsilon set
of size delta to the minus s.
Then we apply Q,
and the size grows.
So what's the problem?
We would like to
iterate, but we cannot.
So why can we not iterate?
Well, a priori we cannot.
I'm not saying-- in the
end, we will iterate.
But why is it completely
unclear whether we can iterate?
AUDIENCE: There's no
guarantee that Q of A
will satisfy the
spacing condition?
PABLO SHMERKIN: Exactly.
That's the issue.
And it is a big issue.
So we know that the
size of Q of A grows.
But here, we have this
additional assumption
and we need it, or we
need some assumption.
We need the assumption that A
is a delta s delta to the minus
epsilon set.
So in order to
iterate, we would need
to know that not only Q
of A has grown in size,
but we would need to know that
Q of is A delta, s plus epsilon
delta to the minus epsilon set.
And we don't know that a priori.
If we go over the proof,
the proof doesn't show that.
So when we-- so I haven't
given the proof of the lemma,
only gave a very rough sketch.
But you have to trust me that
if you go through the proof,
we do not get any
non-concentration for Q of A.
We literally only get
growth at scale delta.
So let me write this somewhere.
Big issue.
We know Q of A grows in
delta-covering number,
but the proof does
not show that Q of A
is delta s plus epsilon
could be a different epsilon.
That's what we did.
The same epsilon, but
we need some epsilon
if we want to iterate here.
So we are going to talk about
some of the things we do to
overcome this in
the next lecture.
But let me say that I think, in
fact, it is not true that Q of A
has to be a delta s plus epsilon
delta to the minus epsilon set.
It is not even true.
But what is true is that
Q of A contains delta
s plus epsilon delta to
the minus epsilon set.
This is good enough
because we just
take the subset and
use that to iterate.
And then we can iterate.
And the second step will
work in the same way,
but this is a big issue.
Somehow, we have to go through
the whole steps of the proof
in the finite field
setting just to get this.
And then we have
to do the full--
so one has to cycle through all
the steps twice in this proof.
The first cycle is
to solve this issue.
So we have to use
one of so many hours,
for example, to
solve this issue.
That comes much later in the
proof in the finite field
setting.
And then we have to use
it again once we have
expanded a lot by iterating.
So I'll explain the ideas
behind this on Thursday.
Yes.
AUDIENCE: After
showing that Q of A
contains a delta X plus
epsilon delta minus epsilon
set, does that set
have to be kind
of very close to the size
of A, and unlike like an s
plus epsilon or
delta spacing level?
PABLO SHMERKIN: Well,
it needs to be much--
something maybe I should
have said, but I didn't say
is that a delta TC--
ignore this for a moment.
So delta TC set has size at
least delta to the minus t.
Because you apply the definition
of delta TC set at scale delta.
This is something I
should have mentioned.
I will try to remember
to mention it next time.
So this set that is
contained actually
has already size bigger
than the size of A.
But in addition to having larger
size, it has good spacing.
But one question
is that I'm going
to answer next time
is, How can we be sure
that something contains?
So this notion of delta s
is set is bad in the sense
that it is not monotone.
So if you take a set
which has this spacing
condition or non-concentration
condition and make it larger,
you may lose the
non-concentration condition.
And that's kind of bad.
So we'll see how to get
around this next time.
Any other questions?
Yes.
AUDIENCE: I wonder
in the two cases
you wrote, so in the first
case, we said that it's dense,
so somehow it is large.
But in the second case, what's
the intuition behind, OK,
I have one element that
is far away from the set,
and then we can get the answer?
PABLO SHMERKIN: It's
really very similar to what
you did in the finite
field setting in the case
when X is in A minus A over A
minus A, and X plus 1 is not.
You use that to show that some
projection of the original set
is large.
AUDIENCE: OK.
PABLO SHMERKIN: This
is a very similar idea,
except that you have to fight
with small denominators.
But morally, it's a
very similar idea.
AUDIENCE: OK